---
title: "The infinite tower"
date: "1978-12-31"
translation: "a-torre-infinita"
---

Babel was the tallest tower ever built. It was 1.958m tall and had 346 floors. Or rather, it had only one floor, depending on how one counts it. The reason is that the building was a perfect spiral: each module — host of exactly one family — was placed higher than its neighbor to the left and lower than its neighbor to the right, in such a way that there was a continuous chain from the first to the last. Later historians proposed that a full three-hundred sixty degrees spin makes up a floor (with the last module of that round almost exactly one floor above the first, the next one exactly above it), but the Babelians did not think of their city in this way. Babel was, for its dwellers, a perfect continuum, in every way.

The base of the tower had a four-hundred meter wide radius and each cycle of the spiral was slightly smaller. The last module was in the middle of the tower, which had therefore the shape of a cone. All the modules were placed across the external wall, so that everyone had access to the terrace, which had a hanging garden, where they planted flowers and vegetables for everyday consumption. It was also an access to fresh air and sunlight.

The Central Communication Cone, which spanned the whole height of the tower minus the last module, was filled with a complicated mesh of channels for communication and transportation between more distant modules — though for reasons soon to be revealed they never traveled very great distances. The work was completed by the year 715 of the Last Age. It was an effort to improve the contact between distant regions of the city. Nonetheless communication was their biggest challenge.

There were as many languages in the tower as there were people living there there — and that amounted consistently over the centuries to just above three million —, but those living close by spoke a similar language — so similar that only trained linguists using powerful computing processes could tell them apart. They showed hard evidence that the languages were different, even grammar-wise. Those living a bit further apart spoke a language a little less similar, but still recognizable, and so on. But climb enough stairs and one could not understand a single word from one's interlocutor. The conventional minimum limit of understandability was around twenty-four modules.

The year after the cone was ready they made the most extraordinary discovery of their history: the first person living in the first module and last person living in the last module spoke the exact same language. No one could explain why, but despite the organic modifications all languages go through — and the languages of Babel were no exception — the first and last module maintained their linguistic connection. This continued to be the case across decades and even generations, as future linguists demonstrated. It also meant that the place was cyclical, as if the first module was connected to the last and the tower was infinite. No actual connection was ever found though.

***

Perhaps the most remarkable achievement of this society was the work known as *The Great Poem*. The project was initiated and supervised by Cleïs Blindmann, who was by all accounts the greatest poet of Babel — some argued she was the greatest in the world. She originally named it *Ode to Babel*, though tradition later rebaptized with what they thought was a more suitable denomination. It was a fantasized epic about the history of Babel. Like the tower itself, the poem was cyclical: those living in the first module would not read the beginning of the story, but a continuation of events that happened in the last verses — which, by the way, they could understand, since the languages were similar.

The poem had four hundred thousand verses and was five million words long. No one person could ever read it whole because it was written in all languages of Babel — at the rate of about twelve languages per verse or around tree words per language. This seemingly impossible feat was made possible in great part by The Cone. But mostly it was the work of this one ambitious poet, whose larger than life character and fame created the myth that she actually wrote everything.

The truth — which is more interesting than the myth — is that Blindmann did not write the full poem. Her main role was as the architect of the project. She coordinated with tens of representatives in all of the regions of the city who in turn coordinated with tens of others who did the same, all the way down to individual poets (five hundred thousand of them), who then — with the help of human writers and automata — got the actual verses written down, following Blindmann's algorithms that came through The Cone.

Notice that due to linguistic barriers nobody could directly communicate with anybody else who was far enough in the chain, so the algorithms had to be transmitted in parts and translated — one could say adapted — every twenty or so modules, whenever the meaning started to fade. At those points, linguists were responsible for analyzing the message and adapting it to the forthcoming languages. The algorithms were so well crafted that they never lost their original meaning and some specialists point at them as the reason why the project worked.

All of the poets employed to write the verses were granted quite a lot of creative freedom, which means no one can ever know the full meaning of the poem. Some scholars later proposed to translate the work to a single language so that the citizens could have access to the full text, but traditional knowledge insisted that this was never the author's intention and even if it was carried out, the result would not be a translation of *The Great Poem*, but rather a derived work.

Evidence of this was an anecdote surrounding the author: When Blindmann was suggested to learn the far away languages so that she could coordinate the writing more authoritatively she refused vehemently, arguing that this was against the core idea. Understanding of the work, she insisted, is bound to be forever incomplete. Babel linguists also affirm that it would anyway be an impossible task as she would have to learn at least a hundred thousand languages in order to oversee the project in any meaningful way.

For good or for evil no translation was ever attempted and full understanding of the poem remains elusive.
